Begin adding Gov2 info to Learn Governance doc (#3605)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/learn/learn-governance.md

mechanism that allows it to evolve gracefully overtime at the ultimate behest of its assembled stakeholders. 
The stated goal is to ensure that the majority of the stake can always command the network.

:::caution Active Development

> The governance protocol has already undergone a couple iterations (v1 and v2) with more changes coming down the pipeline (v2.5). See the comments below for additional details and distinct difference between the various versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The governance protocol has already undergone a couple iterations (v1 and v2) with more changes in the pipeline (v2.5). See the comments below for additional details and for distinct differences between the various versions.
```

:::

{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}'s first decentralised governance system (v1) was comprised of three main components.
1. A technocratic committee to manage upgrade timelines.
2. An approval-voted, elected executive "government" to manage parameters, admin and spending proposals.
3. A general voting system for everything else which rewarded long-term stakeholders with increased influence.

> This system has functioned reasonably well over the first 2-3 years of operation, helping to ensure good use of treasury funds and providing upgrades and fixes in a timely fashion. Like most early technologies the systems and protocols must evolve as they mature to improve upon their shortcomings and keep up with modern advancements. For example, in governance v1 all referenda carry the same weight as only one referenda can be voted on at a time and the voting period can last multiple weeks. This results in the system favoring careful consideration of very few proposals, as opposed to broad consideration of many. With that being said, governance v2 is here!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This system has functioned well over the first few years of operation, helping ensure appropriate usage of treasury funds and enabling timely upgrades and fixes. Like most early technologies, the systems and protocols must evolve as they mature to improve upon their shortcomings and keep up with modern advancements. For example, in Governance v1 all referenda carry the same weight as only one referenda can be voted on at a time and the voting period can last multiple weeks. This results in the system favoring careful consideration of very few proposals, as opposed to broad consideration of many. With that being said, Governance v2 is here!
```

Governance v2 or Gov2 changes how the practical means of day-to-day decisions are made, making the repercussions of referenda better scoped and agile in order to dramatically increase the number of collective decisions the system is able to make.

> **Gov2 is set to launch on Kusama following the final professional audit of its code. Once tested on Kusama, a proposal will be made for the Polkadot network to work on.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Gov2 is set to launch on Kusama following the final professional audit of its code. Once tested on Kusama, a proposal will be made for it to be deployed on Polkadot.**
```

> The following content will begin by walking through many of the core principals of governance on the {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} network. It is important to understand the roots of governance v1 to better understand the direction of the second iteration. These deltas and distinctions will be highlighted throughout the various sub-topics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following content will begin by walking through many of the core principles of governance on the {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} network. It is important to understand the roots of governance v1 to better understand the direction of the second iteration. These deltas and distinctions will be highlighted throughout the various sub-topics.
```

> This being said, it is important to remember that governance is a constantly evolving protocol at this stage in its lifecycle. As updates for governance v2 are making their way to the networks, plans for governance v2.5 are already in development.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This being said, it is important to remember that governance is a constantly evolving protocol at this stage in its lifecycle. As updates for Governance v2 are making their way to the networks, plans for Governance v2.5 are already in development.
```

## Mechanism

> In governance v1, active token holders and the council together administrate a 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v1, active token holders and the council together administrate a 
```

network upgrade decision. No matter whether the proposal is proposed by
the public (token holders) or the council, it will eventually have to go through 

> a referendum to let all holders, weighted by stake, make the decision.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a referendum to let all holders, weighted by stake and conviction , make the decision.
```

To better understand how the council is formed, please read [this section](#council).

> There are several changes here with governance v2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several changes here with Governance v2.
```

The way the new governance model reflects its decentralised character is by:

1. Migrating all responsibilities of Council to token holders via democracy votes
2. Dissolving the current Council collective
3. Allowing users to delegate voting power in more ways to community members

> The Council has fulfilled its role as the representative of passive token holders, guardian of the treasury and initiator of legislation, but the time has come to return these responsibilities to the community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Council in Gov1 has fulfilled its role as the representative of passive token holders, guardian of the treasury and initiator of legislation, but is often seen a centralized entity. To further decentralize Polkadot and Kusama networks, Gov2 proposes to return the responsibilities of the council back to the community.
```

## Referenda

Referenda are simple, inclusive, stake-based voting schemes. Each referendum has a specific
*proposal* associated with it that takes the form of a privileged function call in the runtime (that
includes the most powerful call: `set_code`, which can switch out the entire code of the runtime,
achieving what would otherwise require a "[hard fork](./../general/glossary#hard-fork)").

Referenda are discrete events that have a fixed voting period. When the voting period ends and the votes are tallied,
the function call (`set_code`) is made if the vote is approved. Referenda are always binary; your only options in
voting are "aye", "nay", or abstaining entirely.

> In governance v1, referenda can be started in one of several ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v1, referenda can be started in one of several ways:
```

approved, it would be scheduled for enactment. Referenda is considered *unbaked* if it is pending 
an outcome, i.e. being voted on.

If a proposal is submitted by the public or council there is a fixed enactment delay period of 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.democracy.enactmentPeriod" defaultValue={403200} filter="blocksToDays" /> :polkadot }}{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.democracy.maxProposals" defaultValue={115,200} filter="blocksToDays" /> :kusama }} days.
Proposals submitted as part of the enactment of a prior referendum can set the enactment delay period as desired.
Emergency proposals deal with major problems with the network that need to be "fast-tracked", which leads to shorter enactment times.

In Gov2, anyone is able to start a referendum at anytime and they can do so as many times as they wish. Several new features, known as **Origins and Tracks**, are introduced to help aid in the flow and processing of the referenda protocol.

An Origin can be thought of as a rich descriptor for a given privilege level. The proposer of the referenda now selects an appropriate Origin for their request based on the requirements of the proposal.

> Each Origin is associated with a single referendum class and each class is associated with a Track. The Track outlines the lifecycle for the proposal and is independent from other class's tracks. Having independent tracks allows the network to tailor the dynamics of referenda based upon their implied privilege level.

Reviewer: Can benefit from listing the types of Origins and Referendum classes

Author: Is there a good place to fetch this info from?

The bonded tokens will be released once the proposal is tabled (that is, brought to a vote).

> For governance v1, there can be a maximum of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Governance v1, there can be a maximum of 
```

{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.democracy.maxProposals" defaultValue={100} /> :polkadot }} {{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.democracy.maxProposals" defaultValue={100} /> :kusama }}
public proposals in the proposal queue.

> In Gov2, when a referendum is initially created, it is immediately votable by anyone in the community. However, it is not in a state where it can end, or otherwise have its votes counted, be approved and summarily enacted. Instead, referenda must fulfil a number of criteria before they are moved into a state known as **Deciding**. Until they are in this state, they remain undecided.

Reviewer: Rephrase this sentence - "However, it is not in a state where it can end, or otherwise have its votes counted, be approved and summarily enacted."

```suggestion
In Gov2, when a referendum is initially created, it can be immediately voted on by the community. However, it is not in a state where it can end, or otherwise have its votes counted, be approved and summarily enacted. Instead, referenda must fulfil a number of criteria before they are moved into a state known as **Deciding**. Until they are in this state, they remain undecided.
```

The criteria for entering the Decided state is a follows:
1. A **lead-in period** that outlines the amount of time that must elapse before deciding can begin. This helps mitigate against the possibility of "decision snapping" where an attacker controlling a substantial amount of voting power might seek to have a proposal passed immediately after proposing, not allowing the overall voting population adequate time to consider and participate.

> 2. There must be room for the decision. All Tracks specify their own limit on the number of referenda which can be decided simultaneously. Tracks that have more potent abilities will have lower limits.

Reviewer: Which tracks have potent abilities?
```suggestion
2. There must be room for the decision. All Tracks specify their own limit on the number of referenda which can be decided simultaneously. Tracks that have more potent abilities will have lower limits.
```

> 3. A **Decision Deposit** must be paid. Creating a referendum is cheap as the deposit value consists of only the value required for the on-chain storage needed to track it. Having a referendum reviewed and decided upon carries greater risk and uses up limited space since there is a limited number of referenda which can be active in the process simultaneously. This leads to a larger, but refundable, deposit requirement helping to mitigate spam and bloating of the system.

Reviewer: Rephrasing it a bit

```suggestion
3. A **Decision Deposit** must be paid. Creating a referendum is cheap as the deposit value consists of only the value required for the on-chain storage needed to track it. But, having a referendum reviewed and decided upon carries the risk of using up the limited spots available in the referenda queue. It makes sense to have a larger, but refundable deposit requirement to help mitigate spam.
```

#### Voting Timetable

> In governance v1, every 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v1, every 
```

{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.democracy.votingPeriod" defaultValue={403200} filter="blocksToDays" /> :polkadot }}{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.democracy.votingPeriod" defaultValue={100800} filter="blocksToDays" /> :kusama }} days, 

> a new referendum will come up for 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a new referendum will be up for 
```

a vote, assuming there is at least one proposal in one of the queues. There is a queue for Council-approved 
proposals and a queue for publicly submitted proposals. The referendum to be voted upon alternates between 
the top proposal in the two queues.

The "top" proposal is determined by the amount of stake bonded behind it. If the the current queue selection attempts to create a referendum with no proposals (it is empty) and proposals are waiting in the
other queue, the top proposal in the other queue will become a referendum.

Multiple referenda cannot be voted upon in the same period, excluding emergency referenda.

> An emergency referendum occurring at the same time as a regular referendum (either public- or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An emergency referendum occurring at the same time as a regular referendum (either public or
```

#### Tallying

> In governance v1, there are three resulting scenarios that can occur,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v1, there are three resulting scenarios that can occur,
```

is low, therefore, based on the above result, the referendum will be rejected. In addition, only the
winning voter's tokens are locked. If the voters on the losing side of the referendum believe that
the outcome will have negative effects, their tokens are transferrable so they will not be locked
into the decision. Moreover, winning proposals are autonomously enacted only after the enactment delay period.

#### Voting on a referendum (governance v2)

> In governance v2, a proposal is approved if it meets the requirements for **approval** and **support**, removing the adaptive quorum biasing system. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v2, a proposal is approved if it meets the requirements for **approval** and **support**, removing the adaptive quorum biasing system. 
```

> Approval is defined as the share of approval vote-weight (after adjustment for conviction) against the total number of vote-weight (for both approval and rejection).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Approval** is defined as the share of approval vote-weight (after adjustment for conviction) against the total vote-weight (for both approval and rejection).
```

> Support is the total number of votes in the approval (ignoring any adjustment for conviction) compared to the total possible amount of votes that could be made in the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Support** is the total number of votes in the approval (ignoring any adjustment for conviction) compared to the total possible votes that could be made in the system.
```

> It must fulfill this criteria for the minimum of the **Confirmation Period**. Different tracks have different Confirmation Periods and requirements for approval and support. It is now possible to configure a proposal in such a way that an increasingly lower amount of support and overall approval for the proposal are needed for it to pass. With proposals that use less privileged origins, it is far more reasonable to drop the required turnout to a more realistic amount earlier than those which use highly privileged classes such as `Root`. Similarly, classes which command more political significance will tend to accept less controversy (and thus require a higher approval) early on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It must fulfill this criteria for the minimum of the **Confirmation Period**. Different tracks have different Confirmation Periods and requirements for approval and support. It is now possible to configure the amount of support and overall approval required for it to pass. With proposals that use less privileged origins, it is far more reasonable to drop the required turnout to a more realistic amount earlier than those which use highly privileged classes such as `Root`. Classes with more political significance can be made to require a higher approval early on, to avoid controversy.
```

In Gov2, proposals that are not approved after 
{{ polkadot: <RPC network="polkadot" path="consts.democracy.votingPeriod" defaultValue={403200} filter="blocksToDays" /> :polkadot }}{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="consts.democracy.votingPeriod" defaultValue={100800} filter="blocksToDays" /> :kusama }} 

> days are considered rejected by default and the Decision Deposit is refunded. If the proposal managed to become and remain passing for the Confirmation Period, it is considered approved and is scheduled to execute from the proposed origin but after the Enactment Period . The Enactment Period is specified when the referendum is proposed but is also subject to a minimum value based on the Track. More powerful Tracks enforce a larger Enactment Period to ensure the network has ample time to prepare for any changes the proposal may bring.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
days are considered rejected by default and the Decision Deposit is refunded. If the proposal manages to stay passing till the end of the Confirmation Period, it is considered approved and is scheduled to execute from the proposed origin after the Enactment Period . The Enactment Period is specified when the referendum is proposed but is also subject to a minimum value based on the Track. More powerful Tracks enforce a larger Enactment Period to ensure the network has ample time to prepare for any changes the proposal may bring.
```

In contrast, when it has a 75% turnout, the tally of "aye" votes has to reach 54%, which means that
the super-majority required decreases as the turnout increases.

When the council initiates a new proposal through unanimous consent, the referendum is put to a
vote using "Negative Turnout Bias". In this case, it is easier to pass the proposal with low
turnout and requires a super-majority to reject. As more token holders participate in voting, the
bias approaches a plain majority carries.

Referring to the above image, when a referendum only has 25% turnout, the tally of "aye" votes has
to reach 34% for it to pass.

When the turnout rate is low, a super-majority is required to reject the proposal . This means a lower threshold of "aye" votes have to be reached, but as turnout increases towards 100%, it
becomes a simple majority.

All three tallying mechanisms - majority carries, super-majority approve, and super-majority
against - equate to a simple majority-carries system at 100% turnout.

> Adaptive quorum biasing is longer used in governance v2, in replace of the Approval/Support system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adaptive quorum biasing is longer used in Governance v2 and is replaced by the Approval/Support system.
```

## Council

> In governance v1, passive stakeholders are represented on {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v1, passive stakeholders are represented on {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} 
```

> via a governing body known as "council". The council is an on-chain entity comprising several actors, each 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
via a governing body known as the "council". The council is an on-chain entity comprising several actors, each 
```

represented as an on-chain account. On {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}, 
the council currently consists of
{{ polkadot:  <RPC network="polkadot" path="query.council.members" defaultValue={Array(13)} filter="arrayLength" /> :polkadot }}{{ kusama: <RPC network="kusama" path="query.council.members" defaultValue={Array(19)} filter="arrayLength" />  :kusama }} 
members.

Along with [controlling the treasury](learn-treasury.md), the council is called upon primarily for
three tasks of governance: 

> 1. proposing sensible referenda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Proposing sensible referenda
```

> 2. cancelling uncontroversially dangerous or malicious referenda

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Cancelling dangerous or malicious referenda
```

> 3. electing the technical committee

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Electing the Technical Committee
```

:::

> In governance v2, an alternate strategy was required to replace the Council in its previous duties as a body delegated by voters to compensate for the fact that many choose to not take part in day-to-day of governance. Gov2 builds on the **Vote Delegation** feature from v1 where a voter can choose to delegate their voting power to another voter in the system. It does so by improving a feature known as **Multirole Delegation**, where voters can specify a different delegate for every class of referendum in the system. So for example, a voter could delegate one entity for managing a less potent referenda class, choose a different delegate for a different class with more powerful consequences and still retain full voting power over any remaining classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v2, an alternate strategy was required to replace the Council in its previous duties as a body delegated by voters to compensate for the fact that many choose to not take part in day-to-day of governance. Gov2 builds on the **Vote Delegation** feature from v1 where a voter can choose to delegate their voting power to another voter in the system. It does so by improving a feature known as **Multirole Delegation**, where voters can specify a different delegate for every class of referendum in the system. So for example, a voter could delegate one entity for managing a less potent referenda class, choose a different delegate for a different class with more powerful consequences and still retain full voting power over any remaining classes.
```

### Canceling

> In governance v1, a proposal can be canceled if the [technical committee](#technical-committee) unanimously agrees to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v1, a proposal can be canceled if the [Technical Committee](#technical-committee) unanimously agrees to
```

If the cancellation is controversial enough that the council cannot get a two-thirds majority, then
it will be left to the stakeholders *en masse* to determine the fate of the proposal.

> In governance v2, there is a special operation for intervening with a proposal that is already being voted on known as **Cancelation**. The operation will immediately reject an ongoing referendum regardless of its status. Depending on the roots of the incident there is also potential for the initial proposer of the deposit to get slashed.

Reviewer: Rephrased it. Check for factual correctness

```suggestion
In Governance v2, there is a special operation called **Cancelation** for intervening with a proposal that is already being voted on. The operation will immediately reject an ongoing referendum regardless of its status. There is also a provision to ensure the deposit of the proposer to get slashed, if the proposal is malicious or spam.
```

> Cancelation is itself a governance operation which must be voted upon by the network in order to execute. Since there is usually some urgency to this type of operation, Cancelation comes with its own Origin and Track which has a low lead-time and Approval/Support curves with slightly sharper reductions in their thresholds for passing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cancelation itself is a governance operation which must be voted upon by the network in order to be executed. Cancelation comes with its own Origin and Track which has a low lead-time and Approval/Support curves with slightly sharper reductions in their thresholds for passing, given that it is invoked with a sense of urgency.

```

The prime member is chosen based on a [Borda count](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Borda_count).

The purpose of having a prime member on the council is to ensure a quorum, even when several members
abstain from a vote. Council members might be tempted to vote a "soft rejection" or a "soft
approval" by not voting and letting the others vote. With the existence of a prime member, it forces
councillors to be explicit in their votes or leave their voting privilege up to the prime member.

## Technical Committee

> In governance v1, the Technical Committee (TC) was introduced in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v1, the Technical Committee (TC) was introduced in the
```

referendum. Thus, with fast-tracked referenda it is possible to have two active referendums at the
same time. Voting on one does not prevent a user from voting on the other.

> In governance v2, a new successor committee was introduced, known as the "Polkadot Fellowship", to replace the Technical Committee. It will serve both the Polkadot and Kusama networks. See additional details below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Governance v2, a new successor committee was introduced, known as the "Polkadot Fellowship", to replace the Technical Committee. It will serve both the Polkadot and Kusama networks. See additional details below.
```

## Polkadot Fellowship

The Fellowship is a mostly self-governing expert body with a primary goal of representing humans who embody and contain the technical knowledge base of the Polkadot network and protocol. This is accomplished by associating a rank with members to categorize the degree to which the system expects their opinion to be well-informed, of a sound technical basis and in line with the interests of Polkadot.

> Unlike the current Technical Collective it is designed to be far broader in membership (i.e. to work well with even tens of thousands of members) and with far lower in barriers to entry (both in terms of administrative process flow and expectations of expertise). Becoming a candidate member in the Fellowship is as easy as placing a small deposit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike the current Technical Collective, it is designed to be far broader in membership (i.e. to work well with even tens of thousands of members) and with far lower barriers to entry (both in terms of administrative process flow and expectations of expertise). Becoming a candidate member in the Fellowship is as easy as placing a small deposit.
```

Members of the Fellowship can vote on any given Fellowship proposal and the aggregate opinion of the members (weighted by their rank) constitutes the Fellowship's considered opinion.

> The mechanism by which the Fellowship votes is the same (Substrate pallet) as what is used for Polkadot stakeholder voting for a proposed referendum.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The mechanism by which the Fellowship votes is the same as what is used for Polkadot stakeholder voting for a proposed referendum.
```

### Ranking System

So how exactly does this ranking system work?

> To prevent a small group of participants from gaining effective control over the network this system will adhere to three main principles:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent a small group of participants from gaining effective control over the network, this system will adhere to three main principles:
```

1. The Fellowship must never have hard power over the network: it cannot change the parameters, conduct rescues or move assets. Their only power in governance resides in the the ability to reduce the effective timeline on which a referendum takes place.
2. The Fellowship weights those with a higher rank more in the aggregate opinion, however the weight should not be so high as to make a small number of higher members’ opinions be insurmountable when compared to a coherent opinion coming from lower-ranked membership.
3. The Fellowship should be designed to grow and develop its membership and their aggregate levels of expertise and in doing so ensure that its overall decision-making capacity gets stronger over time.

To support these conditions, the Fellowship will have a constitution which outlines the requirements and expectations for individuals to attain and retain any given rank. Higher ranks are able to vote and promote lower ranks based on this constitution.

**Demotion** occurs automatically after a given period has elapsed and the member is unable to defend their position to their peers.

> **Suspension** can happen only through general referendum, ensuring controversy or unpopularity with the Fellowship alone does not necessarily result in expulsion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Suspension** can happen only through general referendum, which ensures that the Fellowship's bias alone does not necessarily result in expulsion.
```

> Gaining access to top tiers of the ranks will also require a referendum, as to prevent the Fellowship from becoming a cabal (popularity with Fellowship peers alone is not enough to gain access to a top rank).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To prevent the Fellowship from becoming a cabal (popularity with Fellowship peers alone should not be enough to gain access to a top rank), gaining access to top tiers of the ranks will require a referendum. 
```

> ### Whitelisting

Reviewer: Section benefits from examples
